So in the year 1928, a young student by the name of Simone Weil applied to one of the most prestigious universities in the entire world… it was located IN France, known for its science and philosophy programs. The school was called the École Normale Supérieure… or at least that’s how we say it here in America, at our philosophy hoedowns that we have.  



Anyway if you were a kid and you wanted to be a famous philosopher when you grew up and for some reason you GOT INTO THIS school…you’d FIT right in with the people around you…I mean TONS of famous thinkers went there you got Jean Paul Sarte, Jacque Derrida, Michel Foucault, more names than ANYONE out there really cares to hear right now. 



Point is… it was a pretty competitive school to get into when Simone Weil applied and eventually got accepted. And WHEN she did…she was one of only ELEVEN people that were accepted in her class. OF those eleven people she was the only woman accepted. And upon completion of the certificate in general philosophy and logic…she scored the HIGHEST marks out of ANYONE that was taking the test at the time, taking first place. SECOND place it turns out…went to the only OTHER woman who was going for the certificate at the time. And HER name was Simone De Beauvoir. 



Simone De Beauvoir would later write… YEARS later about a conversation she had one time with Simone Weil, DURING their time at the school.



There was a famine that happened in China in 1928, lasted a couple years. The two of them were obviously well informed about all that was going on…and you can imagine them standing in the halls of this BEAUTIFUL school in France with its archways and its artwork and them having a conversation about what the RESPONSE should be… to this FAMINE… that’s killing MILLIONS of people out there. To which Simone Weil… was COMPLETELY adamant in the conversation saying… that there is one thing that matters that we should all be FOCUSING on here…and that is the revolution that needs to happen… that is going to FEED all of the people around the world that are starving. 



Now, Simone De Beauvoir, THINKING like an existentialist philosopher, you know future author of the second sex and the ethics of ambiguity…SHE hears this and says back to her, well look…the problem is not to make people happy, she said, the problem is to find a REASON for their existence. 



At which point, apparently, Simone Weil takes a step back…looks Simone De Beauvoir up and down head to her feet and says, “it’s easy to see YOU’VE never gone hungry.”



Let this be the first moment in this series that illustrates… an ongoing contrast between two VERY DIFFERENT approaches to WHAT PHILOSOPHY IS.



None of this is to impugn the work of Simone De Beauvoir by the way, many of you out there know shes my favorite… hanging on the wall next to the desk I record every one of these podcast episodes at is a framed picture of simone weil next to a canvas painting of simone de beavoir…mad respect to BOTH of these philosophers…but… Simone Weil, was just a different kind of beast when it comes to LIVING philosophy. 



If you are ANYBODY…that tries to LIVE by values that MATTER to you in this world…if you’re in ANY WAY trying to improve as a person with the time you got left on this planet…I don’t even know if it’s POSSIBLE, for you to read the journals of Simone Weil…and not feel EMBARRASSED at the level that you obviously need to be stepping your game up. 



This is a woman that died at the age of 34 years old, laying in the hospital, sick with complications from tuberculosis, denying most of her meals because she refused to eat more than the rations of the people fighting in the French resistance. This is a person who STARVED to death, with food ALL around her, because she was unwilling to compromise her ethical integrity. Should be said there’s different interpretations of her final days in the hospital, but the point I’m trying to illustrate is that there is a CLEAR difference between philosophers throughout history, who are academics, abstract, theoretical masterminds… they write DOZENS of books and undeniably make TONS of progress when it comes to human thought…and then there’s people throughout history whose very existence just IS their philosophy. 



And even more so than someone like a Diogenes or a Boethius or even Socrates…for me personally…there is no better EXAMPLE of a LIVING philosophy, than Simone Weil. To her it’s like, what’s the point of sitting around…TALKING about philosophy all day, HAVING all these conversations if you’re gonna live a life that doesn’t correspond with ANY of the insights you’ve gained? At a certain point… it just seems like a waste of time. It’s like spending your life studying the absolute PERFECT way to play tennis, to think about tennis every day…THOUSANDS of hours invested into it…but then never playing tennis…or playing tennis and just CHOOSING to be horrible at it for some reason.



And it's because of this mindset she had as well as just the short duration of her life, that a lot of people when TALKING about Simone Weil, will try to describe HER… by telling anecdotes from her early life. They’ll talk about the time she was six years old, and told her mom and dad that she refused to eat sugar or wear socks because she heard about the soldiers on the front line and what they have to go through. Or the time when she was a teenager and taught HERSELF sanskrit so she could read the Bhagavad-Gita in its original language.



These are supposed to be stories… where people say AFTER THE FACT, wow…we sure saw the writing on the wall with THIS one early on didn’t we? hmm!…but to me… this sort of naturalizes Simone Weil in a way that isn’t really fair to her. It suggests… that she was just BORN someone, with a genetic predisposition to LIVE in the way she did…BORN to be a person some religious people refer to as an actual modern day saint. BORN to be what Albert Camus called the only great spirit of our time. To be the person Simone De Beauvoir envied for having “a heart that could beat right across the world, she said.” No, if we want to understand the incredibly rare exception to humanity that WAS Simone Weil…we have to understand how her life was lived… and ALL of the beautiful changes that go on when you are someone as TRULY open, to what the universe has to offer, as SHE was. And NO ONE…is simply BORN… with the genius that SHE developed. 



This is going to be a SERIES, on the life and work of Simone Weil. And I find myself in a rough spot at the BEGINNING of all this as someone that does a thirty minute podcast for you to listen to. There is SO MUCH to talk about between stories from her life and the philosophy that came OUT of those stories…that I think it’s impossible to do any semblance of justice with any single episode. But I also think that’s potentially a strength. Because again To BE someone that does a 30 minute podcast… I’m not relegated to a curriculum here…I’m not trying to cover a comprehensive HISTORY of philosophy with this podcast…I’m trying to do what I ALWAYS do… which the way I always think of it is that I’m trying to talk to you listening right now… like I’m trying to talk to a friend about something from philosophy that’s inspired thinking in me…that’s all I EVER try to do here is give other people the most COOL stuff I can. And WITH that in mind at a certain point…I’ve accepted that I have to just come to a level of peace with this first 30 minute installment, WHATEVER it ends up being, knowing that there are OTHER installments yet to come. 



My hope here today is that throughout this episode we can at least START thinking about the way that Simone Weil lived her life…and to START THINKING in the direction her philosophy is eventually going to take us as we cover deeper and deeper levels of DETAIL. 



And to get us going in that direction…one philosophical THEME, that we’re gonna be returning back to throughout this series in varying degrees of detail…is the IDEA of attention. Attention was, for Simone Weil, an absolutely CRUCIAL skill to develop if you were going to live life in a way that wasn’t at the mercy of other FORCES in the world around you. 



See, just learning the proper way to DIRECT your ATTENTION…not only can it change YOUR life… it can change the lives of the people around you, and then WITH that it can go on to change the world and then the course of HUMAN HISTORY along with it…consider for a second just how IMPORTANT…the way we pay ATTENTION, really is…NOT ONLY does the quality of the ATTENTION that you have dictate, every experience THAT you ever have…but even more important than that, your attention ALSO dictates…which experiences…are even POSSIBLE for you to experience. 



Now this point…is going to be critical when understanding how important ATTENTION is at practically every level of our existence…we’ll see it applied in her epistemology, her cosmology, ontology, we’ll talk about all the logies eventually. Don’t worry, uh. But I think a helpful place to start making the case for an ethics of attention…again just to get us started THINKING in this direction that Simone Weil is headed…I think it might be useful to talk about the IMPORTANCE of attention, at MAYBE the most basic, every day level you possibly could. 



EVERYBODY listening to this knows, that throughout your day to day existence…the way that you ORIENT yourself towards the things that are going on in your world… can have a DRASTIC impact on the EXPERIENCE, that you end up HAVING of the thing that’s going on. For example.



Someone invites you out to a get together with some friends. A social meetup let’s call it. Now most of the people going to this meetup you’re cool with… but then there’s the one guy that going…and he’s a guy that…well, now that you think about it… may be top 2 top 3… dumbest people that you’ve ever laid eyes upon. He’s the worst. You REALLY don’t wanna go to this thing, but your friend asked you to go so you go anyway…and WHEN you do…almost like magic…THAT person is horrible, AS USUAL… and YOU… end up having the negative experience that you were EXPECTING to have going into it. 



Now CONTRAST this situation with some other day of the week, totally different meetup, different people…and this one…at the start of it you KNOW is going to be boring…again, you don’t WANT to go, but THIS time you decide you’re gonna channel a little Nietzsche, little Amor Fati, accept that which is necessary…this time you’re gonna GO to the meet up and you’re gonna just be OPEN to the experience… WHATEVER happens. 



You DO this and, then again, magically…sometimes in a spot like this, you end up surprising yourself, you end up GETTING something SURPRISINGLY useful out of a situation you otherwise thought you’d hate. Simone Weil might want to ask at this point: what was DIFFERENT about these two approaches, these different ORIENTATIONS, towards each of the MEETUPS that you went to? 



And before ANY of you out there… in your open toed sandals start talking about the power of positive thinking…you know, the second time you just recognized how blessed we were to be alive man. Uh, no. No, nobody WILLED themselves into being positive in the second meetup. If anything, Simone Weil would say, you did LESS the second time around…you just decided to REMOVE some of the BAGGAGE that you were bringing to the FIRST get together. 



No, the big difference REALLY when you think about it was that at the second meetup…you were just more OPEN…to a DIFFERENT KIND, of EXPERIENCE being available to you. In other words…your ATTENTION… was different…in the second meetup you were FAR more prepared to be RECEPTIVE to an entirely different READ on the situation. 



Kind of embarrassing because of how BASIC it may seem, but this was a concept that hit me pretty hard when I first read Simone Weil years ago. The idea that a different experience of EVERYTHING you do is available to you…right now…ALL AROUND YOU. Almost like a radio station that’s CONSTANTLY broadcasting a show that you’re not CURRENTLY tuning into…and that at ANY MOMENT…you can tune into that station…you can just CHOOSE to be OPEN to a DIFFERENT kind of experience. That’s a real possibility.



On the other hand though you can ALSO choose…to just NEVER be open to ANY experience, that you’re not arriving at by DEFAULT…and then you can SPEND the rest of your life ONLY HAVING your DEFAULT perception of things and the first thing that bubbles up into your head. That’s a real possibility too! 



There’s a sense in which, THAT experience…where you got something profound out of something that otherwise could have been boring…that experience was ALWAYS possible for you to have…but UNLESS if you were willing to tune into that specific frequency…for all intents and purposes that experience, doesn’t exist in your world…and here’s the really important part at the deeper levels of her philosophy: that experience… was IMPOSSIBLE… for you to EVER receive, until you were OPEN to receiving it. 



Think about someone that lives in the most beautiful place in the world… but they never stop anymore to look around them and appreciate the beauty of the place that they live in…stuff around them… just becomes some blurry set and setting, a song playing in the background as they drive from place to place… running errands. Think of the experience of the person that’s possible when RUNNING those kinds of errands…someone so focused on the menial tasks they gotta get done to maintain their life, oh god I gotta pay the electric bill today…they’re so focused on the electric bill that they don’t remain open to the moments they’re living in right now and what lessons the universe may be disclosing, that they’re just not paying attention to. Like the person sitting in the lobby of a restaurant, waiting for their to go order, staring down at their phone, paying attention to a screen, only to glance up every so often at the world, lamenting about how they don’t have a meaningful connection to anything.



ALL of this… has to do with the way that we PAY ATTENTION to the things going on around us. 



And Simone Weil was totally aware of all this. More than that, she was AWARE of the fact that most people seem to fall into a sort of DEFAULT state of attention, given to them PARTIALLY by their biology, but MOSTLY from things GROUND INTO THEIR HEADS from the time they’re babies. 



Which HAS to beg the question: where exactly do we GET this default state of attention? How much thought and effort do ANY of us really put in…to the way we ORIENT ourselves to reality? 



And no doubt there’s tons of people that meditate or pray whose hands are starting to chafe from patting themselves on the back so much right about now…I know EXACTLY… what Simone Weil’s talking about. And no doubt what you’re doing is a good start, not trying to hate. I’m just saying let’s be sure to respect the work of Simone Weil as well. 



Because the kind of attention that SHE writes about in her journals… the kind of attention that can offer sacrament to the world…that is something incredibly rare, something that spans across multiple different landscapes of our thinking…not just something you can get from an app that for ten bucks a month will tell you to pay attention to your shoulders, AND…whenever you’re ready…come back to the sound of my voice and return to your life of misery.



No, we LEARN how to pay attention in HORRIBLE ways from the world we live in…and let’s TALK about one of the FIRST places we LEARN to pay attention horribly: the way we were educated in school. Which also, conveniently, happens to be the next section in the story of Simone Weil’s life. So CONVENIENT how that lined up. 



Remember I said that if you wanted to be a famous philosopher…a good idea would be to GO to the really nice school that Simone Weil went to? Well here’s ANOTHER important thing that you should understand about Simone Weil…she didn’t CARE, WHATSOEVER about BECOMING a famous philosopher. She certainly WASN’T famous when she was alive…quite frankly…she was FAR TOO BUSY LIVING LIFE, to ever PAUSE enough in this world to become a FAMOUS person. 



She graduates from the fancy school, she shuffles around for a bit and then eventually decides that the best place to apply herself right out of school…is to get a job TEACHING the next generation of students.



And IT IS CLEAR, that, EVEN AT this super early stage in her life…she ALREADY KNEW that there was a BIG problem with the way that students were being educated and TAUGHT how to pay attention to the world around them in a narrow way. 



Because when you read the stories from the students that were in her classes…Simone Weil…wasn’t like other teachers at the time. She didn’t give grades like other teachers. She didn’t give tests like other teachers. There’s a story from a student that talks about her teaching Geometry one day where all they did was, they WENT outside, they gathered together under a tree, and the student described what they did that day as they just sat there and sort of “sought out, NEW PROBLEMS, in Geometry”. 



Meaning this wasn’t like a typical classroom…Simone Weil didn’t hand out a bunch of geometrical puzzles that the students were supposed to find the ANSWERS to before the end of the class. No, they just sat under a tree… and thought, as openly as they possibly could, about the PROBLEMS of geometry… not really LOOKING for an answer necessarily, but trying to remain as open as they could to WHATEVER it was…that came out of their process of thinking. Maybe it was a new line of thought ABOUT the problems. Maybe it was a connection between similar kinds of problems…maybe it was just the discovery of NEW UNSOLVED problems. ALL of that, was GREAT to Simone Weil. 



Now WHY…would ANY TEACHER…think it was a good idea to educate students IN THIS WAY? Is Simone Weil like one of those super progressive teachers that doesn’t give grades anymore…she gives the kids like a red kangaroo for all the effort they put in today? Nice work! No it wasn’t about that…it was much MORE… about teaching in a way that doesn’t inherently limit…the way the students ORIENT themselves towards problems in general…in other words it was about not DESTROYING the student’s ability to think openly… by FIXATING them to an agenda where they are always SEARCHING for an ANSWER to the problem. This was a needless limitation for Simone Weil. 



Because that’s how it typically IS in school, right? You’re given problems to solve. You search for the answer to the problem. You memorize the answers and then you’re TESTED at the end of the week to see how many answers you’ve memorized. What could possibly be wrong with that strategy? 



This is what we do in schools right, we TRAIN kids, who then grow up to be the adults of the world, and we tell them that when you come across a situation in your life that you’re confused about…that there MUST be, some distinct ANSWER, to that question that you have that’s out there just waiting to be found. The obvious job then…for ANY PERSON that’s confused about the world in ANY WAY…is to go out SEARCHING, FOR those answers. You SEARCH long enough…you’re probably GOING TO FIND the answer. 



And this is GREAT when it comes to questions like 1+1=2. But what happens when questions start to get a little more complicated than that later ON in life? What happens when there ISN’T a single, correct answer to be found? Questions like what’s the right way to govern a society? Or what’s the best way to live life…POLITICAL questions like what’s the best way to provide healthcare to people, what’s the best way to regulate the economy? 



Well, what HAPPENS Simone Weil thinks…is people go out in SEARCH of these answers to their difficult questions…and they end up SETTLING… on incomplete answers. They end up adhering their thinking to a false idol. They’ve been SO CONDITIONED to SEARCH for the ANSWER to whatever problem they have…that anything that even SEEMS to them like an answer…well… looks like I’ve FOUND the answer. That there folks is the end of my education on the matter. Now my life becomes about DEFENDING, MY ANSWER, which at THIS point now has just become, MY POSITION… and I’m going to vehemently DEFEND my position against all the WRONG answers and DUMB positions that are out there. 



The very PROCESS, of SETTING OUT, SEARCHING for answers…bringing that expectation, orienting your attention in THAT way to WHATEVER it is you’re trying to learn about…just like the person that FINDS the negative experience with the annoying person at the meetup…people FIND incomplete answers that limit their ability to receive deeper levels of 